README.md, before:

# Analysis Scripts Summary

This document provides an overview of the three Python scripts used for analyzing WHRSD record documents and identifying potential issues in Town/District communications.

## Setup

### Prerequisites

- **Python 3.x** (Python 3.8 or higher recommended)
- **pip** (Python package installer)
- **Ollama** (for running LLM models locally)

### Installation Steps

1. **Verify Python Installation**

   Check if Python is installed and verify the version:
   ```bash
   python --version
   # or
   python3 --version
   ```

   If Python is not installed, download it from [python.org](https://www.python.org/downloads/).

2. **Create a Virtual Environment (Recommended)**

   Create an isolated Python environment to avoid conflicts with system packages:
   ```bash
   python -m venv venv
   # or
   python3 -m venv venv
   ```

   Activate the virtual environment:
   - **On macOS/Linux:**
     ```bash
     source venv/bin/activate
     ```
   - **On Windows:**
     ```bash
     venv\Scripts\activate
     ```

3. **Install Python Dependencies**

   Install all required packages from `requirements.txt`:
   ```bash
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   ```

   This will install:
   - `pypdf` - For PDF text extraction
   - `langchain` - LLM framework
   - `langchain-ollama` - Ollama integration
   - `langchain-core` - Core LangChain components

4. **Install and Setup Ollama**

   Ollama is required to run the LLM models locally. Install it from [ollama.ai](https://ollama.ai).

   After installation, download a model (the scripts default to `llama3.2`, but you can use others like `gpt-oss:20b`):
   ```bash
   ollama pull llama3.2
   # or for a larger model
   ollama pull gpt-oss:20b
   ```

   Make sure Ollama is running before executing the scripts:
   ```bash
   ollama serve
   ```

### Verification

Verify the setup by checking that all packages are installed:
```bash
pip list
```

You should see `pypdf`, `langchain`, `langchain-ollama`, and `langchain-core` in the list.

## Overview

These scripts work together to process PDF documents (typically emails), extract financial information, identify discrepancies, flag compliance concerns, and track missing attachments. All scripts use **Ollama LLM** via **LangChain** for intelligent text analysis and store results in a **SQLite database** (`financial_analysis.db`) primarily using a local (running on a computer not run by a company) gpt-oss:20b model.  These same procedures can be obtained by downloading the model to your local computer and 

## Scripts

### 1. `analyze_pdfs.py` - PDF Accounting Gap Analyzer

**Purpose**: Initial processing script that extracts text from PDF files and identifies accounting gaps where monetary amounts changed beyond what was originally expected.

**What it does**:
- Scans a directory for PDF files (recursively)
- Extracts text content from each PDF
- Uses LLM to analyze the content for accounting discrepancies
- Identifies situations where:
  - An initial monetary amount was stated or expected
  - The amount changed or increased beyond the original expectation
  - There is a difference between what was originally thought/budgeted and what actually occurred

**Output**: Creates the `pdf_analysis` table in the database with:
- `id` - Primary key
- `filename` - Name of the PDF file
- `original` - Full extracted text content
- `title` - One-sentence description of the discrepancy
- `description` - Detailed summary of the discrepancy
- `item` - The item/service/line item that the adjustment was for
- `participants` - Comma-separated list of people involved
- `amount_increase` - Dollar amount of the increase (0.00 if no discrepancy)
- `created_at` - Timestamp

**Usage**:
```bash
# Process all PDFs in a directory
python analyze_pdfs.py --pdf-dir pdfs/whrsd-transparency.org/pdfs --db financial_analysis.db

# Use a specific Ollama model
python analyze_pdfs.py --pdf-dir pdfs --db financial_analysis.db --model llama3.2

# Process only new PDFs (skip existing)
python analyze_pdfs.py --pdf-dir pdfs --db financial_analysis.db --skip-existing

# Process all PDFs including already processed ones
python analyze_pdfs.py --pdf-dir pdfs --db financial_analysis.db --no-skip-existing

# Limit processing for testing
python analyze_pdfs.py --pdf-dir pdfs --db financial_analysis.db --limit 10
```

---

### 2. `analyze_alarms.py` - PDF Alarm and Discrepancy Analyzer

**Purpose**: Analyzes all records in the `pdf_analysis` table to identify questionable actions, discrepancies, or subjects that raise compliance alarms.

**What it does**:
- Reads original text content from the `pdf_analysis` table
- Uses LLM to analyze content from a compliance auditor perspective
- Identifies:
  - Questionable actions or decisions
  - Discrepancies or inconsistencies
  - Subjects or topics that raise alarms or red flags
  - Potential ethical or procedural violations
  - Unusual patterns or behaviors
  - Conflicts of interest
  - Any other concerns that warrant attention

**Output**: Creates the `alarm_analysis` table with:
- `id` - Primary key
- `pdf_analysis_id` - Foreign key to `pdf_analysis` table
- `date_time` - Date and time extracted from email headers
- `summary` - Comprehensive summary of findings
- `created_at` - Timestamp

**Usage**:
```bash
# Analyze all unprocessed records
python analyze_alarms.py --db financial_analysis.db

# Use a specific Ollama model
python analyze_alarms.py --db financial_analysis.db --model llama3.2

# Re-process all records (including already processed ones)
python analyze_alarms.py --db financial_analysis.db --no-skip-existing

# Process only a limited number of records (for testing)
python analyze_alarms.py --db financial_analysis.db --limit 10
```

---

### 3. `extract_missing_attachments.py` - Missing Attachments Extractor

**Purpose**: Extracts information about missing attachments from records where `amount_increase > 0`, identifying files that were referenced but not included in the email.

**What it does**:
- Queries `pdf_analysis` table for records where `amount_increase > 0`
- Uses LLM to analyze the original text content
- Identifies missing attachments by looking for phrases like:
  - "Please see attached"
  - "I've attached"
  - "See attachment"
  - References to files that should be attached but aren't present
- Extracts actual filenames with extensions (e.g., `invoice_2024.pdf`, `contract.docx`)
- Extracts the date when the message(s) were sent

**Output**: Creates the `missing_attachments` table with:
- `id` - Primary key
- `pdf_analysis_id` - Foreign key to `pdf_analysis` table
- `filename` - Name of the PDF file that referenced the missing attachment
- `attachment_name` - Name of the missing attachment file (with extension)
- `message_date` - Date and time when the message was sent
- `created_at` - Timestamp

**Note**: If multiple attachments are missing, separate records are created for each attachment with the same `filename` and `message_date`.

**Usage**:
```bash
# Extract missing attachments from all unprocessed records
python extract_missing_attachments.py --db financial_analysis.db

# Use a specific Ollama model
python extract_missing_attachments.py --db financial_analysis.db --model llama3.2

# Re-process all records (including already processed ones)
python extract_missing_attachments.py --db financial_analysis.db --no-skip-existing

# Process only a limited number of records (for testing)
python extract_missing_attachments.py --db financial_analysis.db --limit 10
```

---

## Workflow

The typical workflow for using these scripts is:

1. **First**: Run `analyze_pdfs.py` to process PDF files and populate the `pdf_analysis` table
2. **Second**: Run `analyze_alarms.py` to analyze all records for compliance concerns
3. **Third**: Run `extract_missing_attachments.py` to identify missing attachments in records with financial discrepancies

## Database Schema

### `pdf_analysis` table
- Primary table created by `analyze_pdfs.py`
- Contains extracted text and financial analysis results
- Referenced by both `alarm_analysis` and `missing_attachments` tables

### `alarm_analysis` table
- Created by `analyze_alarms.py`
- Links to `pdf_analysis` via foreign key
- Contains compliance and alarm analysis

### `missing_attachments` table
- Created by `extract_missing_attachments.py`
- Links to `pdf_analysis` via foreign key
- Contains missing attachment information for records with `amount_increase > 0`
- Multiple records per PDF if multiple attachments are missing

## Dependencies

All scripts require:
- Python 3.x
- `pypdf` (or `PyPDF2`) - For PDF text extraction
- `langchain` - LLM framework
- `langchain-ollama` - Ollama integration
- `langchain-core` - Core LangChain components
- **Ollama** - Must be running locally with a model installed (default: `llama3.2`)

Install dependencies:
```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

## Common Options

All scripts support:
- `--db` - Database file path (default: `financial_analysis.db`)
- `--model` - Ollama model to use (default: `llama3.2`)
- `--skip-existing` / `--no-skip-existing` - Whether to skip already processed records
- `--limit` - Limit number of records/files to process (useful for testing)

## Notes

- All scripts use the same logging format and error handling patterns
- Scripts are designed to be idempotent - safe to re-run
- All scripts create appropriate database indexes for better query performance
- Foreign key relationships ensure data integrity when records are deleted

Commit message:

Add output analysis link to README
Added a link to the output analysis in the README.

README.md, after:

# Analysis Scripts Summary

This document provides an overview of the three Python scripts used for analyzing WHRSD record documents and identifying potential issues in Town/District communications.

## Data

A link to the output analysis is here:
https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/14OkLoNyUvtcC-osBgt7EOTo-Rph4-NpYYER-d-Tjxhw/edit?usp=sharing

## Setup

### Prerequisites

- **Python 3.x** (Python 3.8 or higher recommended)
- **pip** (Python package installer)
- **Ollama** (for running LLM models locally)

### Installation Steps

1. **Verify Python Installation**

   Check if Python is installed and verify the version:
   ```bash
   python --version
   # or
   python3 --version
   ```

   If Python is not installed, download it from [python.org](https://www.python.org/downloads/).

2. **Create a Virtual Environment (Recommended)**

   Create an isolated Python environment to avoid conflicts with system packages:
   ```bash
   python -m venv venv
   # or
   python3 -m venv venv
   ```

   Activate the virtual environment:
   - **On macOS/Linux:**
     ```bash
     source venv/bin/activate
     ```
   - **On Windows:**
     ```bash
     venv\Scripts\activate
     ```

3. **Install Python Dependencies**

   Install all required packages from `requirements.txt`:
   ```bash
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   ```

   This will install:
   - `pypdf` - For PDF text extraction
   - `langchain` - LLM framework
   - `langchain-ollama` - Ollama integration
   - `langchain-core` - Core LangChain components

4. **Install and Setup Ollama**

   Ollama is required to run the LLM models locally. Install it from [ollama.ai](https://ollama.ai).

   After installation, download a model (the scripts default to `llama3.2`, but you can use others like `gpt-oss:20b`):
   ```bash
   ollama pull llama3.2
   # or for a larger model
   ollama pull gpt-oss:20b
   ```

   Make sure Ollama is running before executing the scripts:
   ```bash
   ollama serve
   ```

### Verification

Verify the setup by checking that all packages are installed:
```bash
pip list
```

You should see `pypdf`, `langchain`, `langchain-ollama`, and `langchain-core` in the list.

## Overview

These scripts work together to process PDF documents (typically emails), extract financial information, identify discrepancies, flag compliance concerns, and track missing attachments. All scripts use **Ollama LLM** via **LangChain** for intelligent text analysis and store results in a **SQLite database** (`financial_analysis.db`) primarily using a local (running on a computer not run by a company) gpt-oss:20b model.  These same procedures can be obtained by downloading the model to your local computer and 

## Scripts

### 1. `analyze_pdfs.py` - PDF Accounting Gap Analyzer

**Purpose**: Initial processing script that extracts text from PDF files and identifies accounting gaps where monetary amounts changed beyond what was originally expected.

**What it does**:
- Scans a directory for PDF files (recursively)
- Extracts text content from each PDF
- Uses LLM to analyze the content for accounting discrepancies
- Identifies situations where:
  - An initial monetary amount was stated or expected
  - The amount changed or increased beyond the original expectation
  - There is a difference between what was originally thought/budgeted and what actually occurred

**Output**: Creates the `pdf_analysis` table in the database with:
- `id` - Primary key
- `filename` - Name of the PDF file
- `original` - Full extracted text content
- `title` - One-sentence description of the discrepancy
- `description` - Detailed summary of the discrepancy
- `item` - The item/service/line item that the adjustment was for
- `participants` - Comma-separated list of people involved
- `amount_increase` - Dollar amount of the increase (0.00 if no discrepancy)
- `created_at` - Timestamp

**Usage**:
```bash
# Process all PDFs in a directory
python analyze_pdfs.py --pdf-dir pdfs/whrsd-transparency.org/pdfs --db financial_analysis.db

# Use a specific Ollama model
python analyze_pdfs.py --pdf-dir pdfs --db financial_analysis.db --model llama3.2

# Process only new PDFs (skip existing)
python analyze_pdfs.py --pdf-dir pdfs --db financial_analysis.db --skip-existing

# Process all PDFs including already processed ones
python analyze_pdfs.py --pdf-dir pdfs --db financial_analysis.db --no-skip-existing

# Limit processing for testing
python analyze_pdfs.py --pdf-dir pdfs --db financial_analysis.db --limit 10
```

---

### 2. `analyze_alarms.py` - PDF Alarm and Discrepancy Analyzer

**Purpose**: Analyzes all records in the `pdf_analysis` table to identify questionable actions, discrepancies, or subjects that raise compliance alarms.

**What it does**:
- Reads original text content from the `pdf_analysis` table
- Uses LLM to analyze content from a compliance auditor perspective
- Identifies:
  - Questionable actions or decisions
  - Discrepancies or inconsistencies
  - Subjects or topics that raise alarms or red flags
  - Potential ethical or procedural violations
  - Unusual patterns or behaviors
  - Conflicts of interest
  - Any other concerns that warrant attention

**Output**: Creates the `alarm_analysis` table with:
- `id` - Primary key
- `pdf_analysis_id` - Foreign key to `pdf_analysis` table
- `date_time` - Date and time extracted from email headers
- `summary` - Comprehensive summary of findings
- `created_at` - Timestamp

**Usage**:
```bash
# Analyze all unprocessed records
python analyze_alarms.py --db financial_analysis.db

# Use a specific Ollama model
python analyze_alarms.py --db financial_analysis.db --model llama3.2

# Re-process all records (including already processed ones)
python analyze_alarms.py --db financial_analysis.db --no-skip-existing

# Process only a limited number of records (for testing)
python analyze_alarms.py --db financial_analysis.db --limit 10
```

---

### 3. `extract_missing_attachments.py` - Missing Attachments Extractor

**Purpose**: Extracts information about missing attachments from records where `amount_increase > 0`, identifying files that were referenced but not included in the email.

**What it does**:
- Queries `pdf_analysis` table for records where `amount_increase > 0`
- Uses LLM to analyze the original text content
- Identifies missing attachments by looking for phrases like:
  - "Please see attached"
  - "I've attached"
  - "See attachment"
  - References to files that should be attached but aren't present
- Extracts actual filenames with extensions (e.g., `invoice_2024.pdf`, `contract.docx`)
- Extracts the date when the message(s) were sent

**Output**: Creates the `missing_attachments` table with:
- `id` - Primary key
- `pdf_analysis_id` - Foreign key to `pdf_analysis` table
- `filename` - Name of the PDF file that referenced the missing attachment
- `attachment_name` - Name of the missing attachment file (with extension)
- `message_date` - Date and time when the message was sent
- `created_at` - Timestamp

**Note**: If multiple attachments are missing, separate records are created for each attachment with the same `filename` and `message_date`.

**Usage**:
```bash
# Extract missing attachments from all unprocessed records
python extract_missing_attachments.py --db financial_analysis.db

# Use a specific Ollama model
python extract_missing_attachments.py --db financial_analysis.db --model llama3.2

# Re-process all records (including already processed ones)
python extract_missing_attachments.py --db financial_analysis.db --no-skip-existing

# Process only a limited number of records (for testing)
python extract_missing_attachments.py --db financial_analysis.db --limit 10
```

---

## Workflow

The typical workflow for using these scripts is:

1. **First**: Run `analyze_pdfs.py` to process PDF files and populate the `pdf_analysis` table
2. **Second**: Run `analyze_alarms.py` to analyze all records for compliance concerns
3. **Third**: Run `extract_missing_attachments.py` to identify missing attachments in records with financial discrepancies

## Database Schema

### `pdf_analysis` table
- Primary table created by `analyze_pdfs.py`
- Contains extracted text and financial analysis results
- Referenced by both `alarm_analysis` and `missing_attachments` tables

### `alarm_analysis` table
- Created by `analyze_alarms.py`
- Links to `pdf_analysis` via foreign key
- Contains compliance and alarm analysis

### `missing_attachments` table
- Created by `extract_missing_attachments.py`
- Links to `pdf_analysis` via foreign key
- Contains missing attachment information for records with `amount_increase > 0`
- Multiple records per PDF if multiple attachments are missing

## Dependencies

All scripts require:
- Python 3.x
- `pypdf` (or `PyPDF2`) - For PDF text extraction
- `langchain` - LLM framework
- `langchain-ollama` - Ollama integration
- `langchain-core` - Core LangChain components
- **Ollama** - Must be running locally with a model installed (default: `llama3.2`)

Install dependencies:
```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

## Common Options

All scripts support:
- `--db` - Database file path (default: `financial_analysis.db`)
- `--model` - Ollama model to use (default: `llama3.2`)
- `--skip-existing` / `--no-skip-existing` - Whether to skip already processed records
- `--limit` - Limit number of records/files to process (useful for testing)

## Notes

- All scripts use the same logging format and error handling patterns
- Scripts are designed to be idempotent - safe to re-run
- All scripts create appropriate database indexes for better query performance
- Foreign key relationships ensure data integrity when records are deleted
